Add specification for TLS descriptors (#373)
riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc: riscv-elf.adoc

                                            <| S + A + TLSOFFSET
.2+| 11      .2+| TLS_TPREL64   .2+| Dynamic | _word64_          .2+|
                                            <| S + A + TLSOFFSET

> .2+| 12      .2+| TLSDESC32     .2+| Dynamic | See <<TLS Descriptors>> .2+|

Reviewer: Is there a particular reason we need 32 + 64 suffix on these?

1. I think other platforms just use TLSDESC as the reloc type for both 32-bit and 64-bit
2. These map to the same value
3. AFAICT the only differences in this case are related to the size of a GOT slot, so any differences in how the relocation would be calculated should already be accounted for, right?

Author: Thanks.

I didn't know that the other relocs with 32/64 suffix was considered a mistake, and you're right, it's only related to the size and that should be determinable from the binary target arch. I've removed the variants.

(By the way, mapping to the same value was unintentional and a copy-paste mistake.)

} tls_index;
----

==== TLS Descriptors

> TLS Descriptors (TLSDESC) is an alternative implementation of the Global Dynamic model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TLS Descriptors (TLSDESC) are an alternative implementation of the Global Dynamic model
```

> that additionally allows the dynamic linker to achieve performance close to that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that allows the dynamic linker to achieve performance close to that
```

of Initial Exec when the library was not loaded dynamically with `dlopen`.

For each `TLSDESC` relocation inside the GOT, the dynamic linker fills in the
TLS descriptor entry as defined below:

[,c]
----
typedef struct
{

>   unsigned long (*resolver)(tls_descriptor *);

Author: glibc uses `ptrdiff_t` for the return signature in its implementation. Should we use `ptrdiff_t` (better clarity that it's tp-offset) or `unsigned long` (simpler)?

Reviewer 2: I think `unsigned long` is a better choice because `long` is defined by https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/blob/master/riscv-cc.adoc but `ptrdiff_t` isn't.

Author: You're right.

Reviewer 3: Defined by #377 now, and `ptrdiff_t` might be more portable when we have ilp32 on rv64?

Reviewer 4: ILP32 by definition has 32-bit long so that makes no difference (that's why there's an L before the 32 in there)

Reviewer 3: oh yeah, you are right, thanks :)

Author: Yeah, I think we should keep the `long`. As another point, the TP-offset arithmetic may wraparound — `ptrdiff_t` being signed is a minor annoyance as signed integer overflow is technically UB.

  unsigned long data[3]; /* defined by the dynamic linker */
} tls_descriptor;
----

The `resolver` function is called with the address to the `tls_descriptor` itself,
and returns `<address of TLS variable> - tp`.

Up to 3 `unsigned long` may be stored inline within the descriptor. Dynamic linker
implementations may use this to avoid a separate allocation to store data associated

> with the symbol.

Author: To address a question from the last meeting (https://github.com/riscv-admin/psabi/blob/master/MINUTES/meeting-20230403.adoc):

glibc, bionic and BSD libc uses (ti_module, ti_offset, gen_count). musl uses (ti_module, ti_offset). Both cases should happily fit in the 3-slot specification.

The TLS descriptor `resolver` is called with a special calling convention where all
registers all callee-saved, except `a0` which is used to pass the argument and `t0`

> which is used as the alternate link register.

Author: Question: Should vector registers be caller or callee saved? Callee save is better for the fast path, but for the slow path it can suffer from over-conservative register saving.

On x86, SSE/AVX registers follow standard calling convention instead.  
On AArch64, Q (NEON) registers are callee saved, but SVE registers follow standard calling convention instead.

If we're gonna follow suit, then vector registers will be caller saved as in the provisional Vector ABI docs.

Reviewer 3: Is there a guarantee that the TLS resolver will be a leaf function? vector register should be all caller-save *IF* it's not leaf function since `mem*` or `str*` might use vector version, and you never know the which function has call them or not, then you still need to save all register before any function call in TLS resolver.

Author: The fast path is a leaf function while the slow path almost definitely is not. The resolver is written in assembly and conditionally saves registers if it needs to enter the slow path. In that sequence, we could save vector registers as well, if callee-saved vector registers is desired.

In glibc the slow path is only hit once per (module / thread combination) to allocate the storage, so actually it might make more sense to make vector regs callee saved as well.

Reviewer 3: Sound like it worth to having a special calling convention, I guess one challenge here is how to detect the presence of vector extensions, but anyway those stuffs should be addressed on upstream glibc soon by hw probing.

Example assembler load and store of a thread local variable `i` using the `%tlsdesc_hi`, `%tlsdesc_lo_add`, `%tlsdesc_lo_load` and `%tlsdesc_call`
assembler functions. The emitted relocations are in the comments.

[,asm]
----
label:
	auipc tX, %tlsdesc_hi(symbol)         // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20 (symbol)
	lw    tY, tX, %tlsdesc_lo_load(label) // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I (label)
	addi  a0, tX, %tlsdesc_lo_add(label)  // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I (label)

> 	jalr  t0, tY                          // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL (label)

Author: Changed back to `%tlsdesc_call` and it uses a syntax consistent with what we're already doing in `%tprel_add`.

----

`tX` and `tY` in the example may be replaced with any combination of two general purpose registers.

> The linker can use the relocations to recognize the sequence and to perform relaxations. To ensure this correctly, only the following changes to the sequence are allowed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The linker can use the relocations to recognize the sequence and to perform relaxations. To ensure correctness, only the following changes to the sequence are allowed:
```

> - Other instructions that does not clobber the registers used by the sequence may be inserted in between (known as instruction scheduling).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Instructions outside of the sequence that do not clobber the registers used within the sequence may be inserted in-between the instructions of the sequence (known as instruction scheduling).
```

> - Instructions in the sequence with no data dependency may be reordered. For this sequence, the only instructions that can be reordered are `lw` and `addi`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Instructions in the sequence with no data dependency may be reordered. In the preceding example, the only instructions that can be reordered are `lw` and `addi`.
```

implementations may use this to avoid a separate allocation to store data associated
with the symbol.

The TLS descriptor `resolver` is called with a special calling convention where all
registers all callee-saved, except `a0` which is used to pass the argument and `t0`
which is used as the alternate link register.

Example assembler load and store of a thread local variable `i` using the `%tlsdesc_hi`, `%tlsdesc_lo_add`, `%tlsdesc_lo_load` and `%tlsdesc_call`
assembler functions. The emitted relocations are in the comments.

[,asm]
----
label:
	auipc tX, %tlsdesc_hi(symbol)         // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20 (symbol)
	lw    tY, tX, %tlsdesc_lo_load(label) // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I (label)
	addi  a0, tX, %tlsdesc_lo_add(label)  // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I (label)
	jalr  t0, tY                          // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL (label)
----

`tX` and `tY` in the example may be replaced with any combination of two general purpose registers.

The assembly sequence may be arbitrarily interleaved with other instructions for the purpose of
instruction scheduling, but the order of the 4 instructions must not change. The linker can use

> the relocations to recognize the sequence and to perform relaxations.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we want to add a constraint on the order of these four instructions unless it is technically required. The linker can perform optimizations even if these instructions are given in an arbitrary order, no?

Author: I've reworded the constraints and explicitly stated that `lw` and `addi` may be reordered with respect to each other.

} tls_index;
----

==== TLS Descriptors

TLS Descriptors (TLSDESC) is an alternative implementation of the Global Dynamic model
that additionally allows the dynamic linker to achieve performance close to that
of Initial Exec when the library was not loaded dynamically with `dlopen`.

For each `TLSDESC<32,64>` relocation inside the GOT, the dynamic linker fills in the
TLS descriptor entry as defined below:

[,c]
----
typedef struct
{
  unsigned long (*resolver)(tls_descriptor *);
  unsigned long data[3]; /* defined by the dynamic linker */
} tls_descriptor;
----

The `resolver` function is called with the address to the `tls_descriptor` itself,

> and returns the address the TLS variable resolves to.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't it return the offset from TP?

Author: The intention was to save a redundant subtraction and addition when DTV is used.

But now I realized that the relaxation only works if it's specified as the TP offset. So I've changed it to say offset from TP.

} tls_index;
----

==== TLS Descriptors

TLS Descriptors (TLSDESC) are an alternative implementation of the Global Dynamic model
that allows the dynamic linker to achieve performance close to that
of Initial Exec when the library was not loaded dynamically with `dlopen`.

For each `TLSDESC` relocation inside the GOT, the dynamic linker fills in the
TLS descriptor entry as defined below:

[,c]
----

> typedef struct

Reviewer 5: I expect that the section mentions that we reserve a consecutive pair of pointer-sized entry in the GOT for each `TLSDESC(S+A)`.

----
--

==== TLS Descriptors -> Initial Exec Relaxation

Target Relocation:: R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL

> Description:: This relaxation can relax a sequence loading address of a thread-local symbol reference into a GOT load instruction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description:: This relaxation can relax a sequence loading the address of a thread-local symbol reference into a GOT load instruction.
```

Condition:: None.

Relaxation::

- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20` or `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I` can be removed.
- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I` can be replaced with load of the high PC-relative offset of the symbol's GOT entry.
- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL` can be replaced with load of the low PC-relative offset of the symbol's GOT entry.
Example::
+
--
Relaxation candidate:

[,asm]
----
label:
	auipc a0, 0     // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20 (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX
	lw    t0, a0, 0 // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
	addi  a0, a0, 0 // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
	jalr  t0, t0    // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
----

Relaxation result:

[,asm]
----
	lui a0, <pcrel-got-offset-for-symbol-hi>
	{ld,lw} a0, <pcrel-got-offset-for-symbol-lo>(a0)
----
--

==== TLS Descriptors -> Local Exec Relaxation

Target Relocation:: R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL

> Description:: This relaxation can relax a sequence loading address of a thread-local symbol reference into a thread-pointer-relative instruction sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description:: This relaxation can relax a sequence loading the address of a thread-local symbol reference into a thread-pointer-relative instruction sequence.
```

----
--

==== TLS Descriptors -> Initial Exec Relaxation

Target Relocation:: R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL

Description:: This relaxation can relax a sequence of loading address of a thread-local symbol reference into a GOT load instruction.

Condition:: None.

Relaxation::

- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20` or `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I` can be removed.
- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I` can be replaced with load of the high PC-relative offset of the symbol's GOT entry.
- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL` can be replaced with load of the low PC-relative offset of the symbol's GOT entry.
Example::
+
--
Relaxation candidate:

[,asm]
----
label:
	auipc a0, 0     // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20 (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX
	lw    t0, a0, 0 // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
	addi  a0, a0, 0 // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I (label), R_RISCV_RELAX

> 	jalr  t0, t0    // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL (label), R_RISCV_RELAX

Reviewer 2: Don't you want to generalize registers with tX and tY?

Author: The pc-rel values in the examples are replaced with a concrete value, so I've also opted for concrete registers here. I don't have a strong opinion on this though.

Reviewer 5: I think it's useful to generalize the register as it's important for relaxation.

----

Relaxation result:

[,asm]
----
	lui a0, <pcrel-got-offset-for-symbol-hi>
	addi a0, a0, <pcrel-got-offset-for-symbol-lo>
----
--

==== TLS Descriptors -> Local Exec Relaxation

Target Relocation:: R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL

Description:: This relaxation can relax a sequence of the load address of a symbol or load/store with a thread-local symbol reference into a thread-pointer-relative instruction.

>   **TODO:** How do we handle load/stores? Should we annotate the load/store instruction with an additional relocation so that the low offset can be fused into the load/store?

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to try to handle load/stores for TLSDESC because we don't handle even usual GOT-indirect load/stores. I think we can just forget about it.

Author: Removed the TODO, although I'll keep this thread open in case other reviewers want to share their opinion.

Description:: This relaxation can relax a sequence loading address of a thread-local symbol reference into a thread-pointer-relative instruction sequence.

Condition::

- For the short form: Offset between thread-pointer and thread-local symbol is within +-2KiB.
- For the long form: None.

Relaxation::

- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20` or `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I` can be removed.
- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I` can be replaced with the high TP-relative offset of symbol (long form) or be removed (short form).
- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL` can be replaced with the low TP-relative offset of symbol.

Example::
+
--
Relaxation candidate:

[,asm]
----
label:
	auipc a0, 0     // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20 (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX
	lw    t0, a0, 0 // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
	addi  a0, a0, 0 // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
	jalr  t0, t0    // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
----

Relaxation result (long form):

[,asm]
----
	lui a0, <tp-offset-for-symbol-hi>
	addi a0, a0, <tp-offset-for-symbol-lo>
----

Relaxation result (short form):

[,asm]
----

> 	addi a0, a0, <tp-offset-for-symbol>

Reviewer 2: I think it should be `addi a0, x0, <tp-offset-for-symbol>`.

Author: Fixed.

----
--

==== TLS Descriptors -> Initial Exec Relaxation

Target Relocation:: R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL

Description:: This relaxation can relax a sequence loading the address of a thread-local symbol reference into a GOT load instruction.

> Condition:: None.

Reviewer 5: Here should state the condition when the relaxation is applicable. (producing an executable)

- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20` or `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I` can be removed.
- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I` can be replaced with load of the high PC-relative offset of the symbol's GOT entry.
- Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL` can be replaced with load of the low PC-relative offset of the symbol's GOT entry.
Example::
+
--
Relaxation candidate:

[,asm]
----
label:
	auipc a0, 0     // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20 (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX
	lw    t0, a0, 0 // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
	addi  a0, a0, 0 // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
	jalr  t0, t0    // R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL (label), R_RISCV_RELAX
----

Relaxation result:

[,asm]
----
	lui a0, <pcrel-got-offset-for-symbol-hi>
	{ld,lw} a0, <pcrel-got-offset-for-symbol-lo>(a0)
----
--

==== TLS Descriptors -> Local Exec Relaxation

Target Relocation:: R_RISCV_TLSDESC_HI20, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_LOAD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_ADD_LO12_I, R_RISCV_TLSDESC_CALL

Description:: This relaxation can relax a sequence loading the address of a thread-local symbol reference into a thread-pointer-relative instruction sequence.

Condition::

> - For the short form: Offset between thread-pointer and thread-local symbol is within +-2KiB.

Reviewer 5: Here should state the condition when the relaxation is applicable. (producing an executable and defined symbol)
